                         KILOBYTE  -  QUICK HELP
                         ═══════════════════════

 Kilobyte is a desktop that is not really one. There is no mouse pointer
 to chase and no windows to arrange: the Program Manager starts a program,
 the program fills the screen, and when you close it you are back here.


 MOVING AROUND
 ─────────────
   ↑ ↓            move the highlight
   First letter   jump to an item (press again for the next one)
   Enter          run / open / OK
   Tab            move between the list and the buttons
   Esc            back / cancel
   Space          tick an option in a list with ( ) or [ ] boxes
   Ctrl+C         in a program: close it and come back here
                  in a menu: go back
                  in the Program Manager: shut down (it asks first)
                  In the Terminal Ctrl+C stops a command as usual.

 The bottom line of the screen explains the highlighted item.


 THE PROGRAMS
 ────────────
   Editor         mcedit. F9 opens the menu bar, F2 saves, F10 quits.
                  Shift+arrows select, Ctrl+Ins copies, Shift+Ins pastes.
                  Ctrl+C closes it too, asking to save changes first.

   Spreadsheet    sc-im. Move with the arrow keys. Type = to enter a number
                  or formula, e.g.  =A1+A2  or  =@sum(A1:A9)
                  <  or  >  enter left/right aligned text, \ centred text.
                  :w saves, :q quits, :help shows the manual.

   Email          Alpine. The first start asks for your address and sets
                  up the account (Settings > Email account changes it).
                  I inbox, C write, L folders, Q quit; Ctrl+X sends.
                  Gmail, iCloud and Yahoo need an "app password".

   Web browser    ELinks, with CSS and JavaScript. Esc opens the menu bar,
                  g types an address, arrow keys move between links,
                  Enter follows one, ← goes back, q quits. Big web apps
                  (web mail, video sites) are too much for it: use the
                  Email and YouTube programs instead.

   File manager   mc (Midnight Commander). Tab switches panel, F3 views,
                  F4 edits, F5 copies, F6 moves, F7 makes a folder,
                  F8 deletes, F9 opens menus, F10 quits.

   Terminal       A fullscreen command line. Type exit to come back.

   Media
     Video Player   Plays videos and music from ~/Videos and ~/Music or a
                    web address. "Picture" chooses how video is shown:
                      Extreme / Fine / Medium blocks - the screen switches to
                        a tiny font (1x2, 2x4 or 4x8 pixels per character) and
                        the film is drawn with coloured characters
                      Text blocks - the same in the normal font
                      Real picture - the video itself, straight on screen
                    Space pause, left/right seek, 9/0 volume, q stops.
     Music Player   Songs from ~/Music with dancing bars. Enter plays, Space
                    pauses, N and P next and previous, + and - volume,
                    S shuffle, R repeat, W saves the list as a playlist,
                    L opens one.
     YouTube        Search YouTube or paste a link, then watch, save the
                    video (MP4) or save only the sound (MP3). If YouTube
                    stops working, choose "Update the downloader".
     Disc Player    DVD films, audio CDs and data discs. DVD menus are not
                    shown: pick a title; the main film is marked.
     Sound volume   alsamixer. Arrows change, M mutes, Esc closes.

   Settings       Wi-Fi, colour theme, wallpaper, font size, keyboard layout,
                  date and time zone, installing programs, password, task
                  manager. Swap: on a computer with little memory, switch
                  on compressed memory (it also works on the live system);
                  an installed Kilobyte can have a swap file on the disk too.
                  Kilobyte Update can undo the last update; an installed PC
                  also has "undo the last update" in its boot menu.
                  Defaults chooses the programs that open for each job: the
                  text editor (Kilobyte's, nano, vi, Vim, Micro, Emacs), the
                  web browser, file manager, email, spreadsheet and music
                  player. One that is not installed yet gets installed.


 THE DESKTOP (KILOBYTE WINDOWS)
 ──────────────────────────────
   Every program runs in a window of its own; the Program Manager stays.
     ■ Kilobyte (top line) or F12           the Programs menu: every program,
                                            the windows, copy and paste,
                                            volume, lock, log out, shut down
     icons on the desktop                   double-click opens; the right
                                            mouse button has more
     drag the title bar                     move a window: an outline shows
                                            where it goes, let go to put it
     drag the lower right corner            resize it
     double-click the title, or [▲]         maximise / restore
     [▼]                                    minimise (the bottom line brings
                                            it back)
     [X]                                    close
     Alt+Tab, or click the bottom line      switch windows
   Your files on the desktop: whatever is in the folder Desktop of your home
   folder has an icon. In the file manager, F2 > "Put on the desktop".
   Settings > Desktop icons chooses the programs that have one.

   Copy and paste: drag the mouse over text and it is copied (hold Shift
   in programs that use the mouse themselves, such as the file manager).
   The middle mouse button or F11 pastes it into the window in front.
   The Programs menu can also copy all the text of a window.

   The top line shows the network, the volume (click it for a slider),
   the battery and the clock; notes appear in the lower right corner when
   a download is done, a USB stick is plugged in or the battery runs low.
   Weather and news sit on the desktop. Settings > Wallpaper changes the
   desktop: a pattern, your own characters, colours, or a picture.

   Videos in the block modes and as the real picture take the whole screen
   while they play; the Text picture mode plays inside the window.
   Settings > Login and startup switches windows off (one program at a time,
   fullscreen).


 FILES
 ─────
   File manager   Enter opens a file with the right program: documents in the
                  editor, tables in the spreadsheet, pictures in blocks, music
                  in the Music Player, PDF files as text. F3 on a picture shows
                  it. F2 has "Open with", "Move to the trash", "Put on the
                  desktop" and "Print".
   Trash          Accessories > Trash puts things back or deletes them for good.
   Network drives Internet > Network drives connects shared folders of Windows
                  PCs and NAS boxes, and of any computer with SSH; they appear
                  as folders in ~/Network.


 SEVERAL PEOPLE
 ──────────────
   Settings > Users adds users; everybody has their own files and desktop.
   Switch user (Programs menu, or Settings > Users) lets somebody else log
   in on another console while your programs keep running; Ctrl+Alt+F1 to
   F6 go back and forth. Lock the screen (Programs menu, Accessories) hides
   everything until your password is typed; Settings > Screen saver can do
   that after the screen saver too.


 OTHER COMPUTERS
 ───────────────
   Remote Kilobyte  Internet > Remote Kilobyte uses another Kilobyte computer
                    in a window. On that computer switch on Settings > Remote
                    login first.
   Citrix           Internet > Citrix Workspace opens the desktops and programs
                    of a company or school. Citrix's program is not part of
                    Kilobyte: download its Debian package from citrix.com and
                    choose the file there; it then opens on the graphics screen.


 THE STORE
 ─────────
   Accessories > Store installs more text-mode programs with a keypress:
   editors, system monitors, web browsers, chat, games, DOSBox. They show up
   under "More programs".


 MORE PROGRAMS
 ─────────────
   Internet       Chat (IRC rooms), BBS Dialer (bulletin boards with modem
                  sounds), YouTube Downloader.
   Accessories    Paint: arrows move, Space draws, , and . change colour,
                  P L B X C O F E K choose the tool, S saves, U undoes.
                  Print, USB sticks, Backup, Screen saver and more.
   Games          Mines, Solitaire, Reversi, Moon Buggy, Snake and others.
                  Each shows its keys on the bottom line.
   Settings       Also: Wi-Fi hotspot, Bluetooth, printers, screen saver,
                  weather and news tiles, sounds, automatic login.


 WHERE THINGS ARE
 ────────────────
   Your documents are kept in ~/Documents, index cards in ~/Cardfile,
   videos in ~/Videos, music in ~/Music, the desktop's files in ~/Desktop
   and network drives in ~/Network.


 WINDOWS PROGRAMS
 ────────────────
   Accessories > Windows programs runs .exe and .msi files with Wine.
   Graphical programs open full screen in a Windows desktop and you come
   back here when they close; Ctrl+Alt+Backspace leaves at once. Installed
   programs live in ~/.wine (drive C:). On a Raspberry Pi, Wine for PCs runs
   through box64 or box86, which translate PC code for the ARM processor:
   it works, slowly, and not with every program.


 DVDs
 ────
   Most films on DVD are encrypted. Debian does not include the library
   needed to read them (libdvdcss) because it is not legal everywhere. Where
   it is allowed, install it in the Terminal:
     sudo apt install libdvd-pkg && sudo dpkg-reconfigure libdvd-pkg
   (first add "contrib" to the lines in /etc/apt/sources.list).
   Home-made DVDs, audio CDs and data discs work without it.


 THE MOUSE
 ─────────
   On the text console the mouse shows as a block. The web browser and
   the Program Manager's text programs that support it react to clicks.


 INSTALLING
 ──────────
   When Kilobyte runs from a USB stick or CD, "Install Kilobyte to disk"
   in the Program Manager copies it onto the computer's hard disk.
   Everything on that disk is erased.


 CONSOLES
 ────────
   Ctrl+Alt+F2 ... F6 switch to other text consoles; Ctrl+Alt+F1 comes
   back. Log in there and type kilobyte to start another Program Manager.
